Hi, my name is Brian Caffo and
this is the lecture on
Estimation Target being Relevant.
And so I'm gonna start with this quote
from, it's attributed to lots of people,
I give some example up there
which you can find on Wikipedia.
But of course many of
you have heard the song.
But if you can't be with the one you love,
love the one you're with.
And that's the idea behind some of these
surrogate variables we're
gonna talk about today.
If you can't measure the variable you
want, measure the variable you got.
Okay, so what we're basically
talking about in this lecture,
is when you have an outcome you
are interested in studying, but
you can't actually measure it.
You can only measure some surrogate for
it.
And we are gonna talk about
the benefits and pitfalls and
some strategies that you can do
this very common circumstance.
But, even if you don't find
that prior quote less inspire.
Even if you don't find that
prior quote inspiring,
even less inspiring is the classic joke
that talks about the drunk looking for
his keys under the lamp post.
And the police comes up to him and
asks, what are you doing?
And the drunk says, looking for my keys.
And the policeman says, well,
did you drop them near here?
And the drunk says,
no I dropped them over there.
And he's, well, why are you looking here?
And the drunk says,
cuz this is where the light is.
Okay, so let's talk about surrogate
variables and hopefully we won't be
like drunks looking under the lamppost,
hopefully our keys'll be nearby.
So, the idea behind what we're talking
about today, is it's very common
to not be able to directly measure what
is most germane to your investigation,
what you really want to measure.
So, some classic examples.
Body mass index as a measure
of body fat percentage.
So, Bbdy mass index is really
just only take two measurements.
Your weight and your height.
But a real measure of body fat
percentage is much harder.
It takes much more careful measurement,
so BMI is a surrogate variable for
what people really want,
which is body fat percentage.
It's very common for economists to use
GDP as a measure of economic well-being,
even though they fully acknowledge
that it's a crude summary of that.
Probably one of the worst, not worst,
probably one of the hardest examples
are food frequency questionnaires for
calorie consumptions.
So, if you just ask people what
they ate last week to try to and
ascertain their calorie consumption,
that's a very noisy measure,
but it's very hard to get good data
on what people eat either way.
Of course, if you ask people
whether they're going to vote,
you get likely voters, but that doesn't
mean you're gonna get actual voters.
If you measure web traffic that doesn't
mean it's sort of actual web traffic.
You might be getting lots of hits from
web crawlers and things like that.
Search engine crawlers and
that sort of thing.
So in my area, the area that I work in,
we study something called
Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging.
We would really like to measure people's
brain activation, we really wanna get at
let's say neuronal signaling, but we don't
get that, we get instead a very crude
proxy for this called the blood oxygen
level dependent or BOLD signal.
So, this phenomenon of not getting
to measure what you want, but
getting the measure of some
surrogate that's close or
hopefully close is a very common problem.
So what are some hallmarks
of good surrogates?
Well, the best surrogates
are gonna be unbiased.
Even if they're noisy and they're not
completely like the variable that they're
measuring, they're not systematically
larger or systematically smaller.
And ideally they have a known
variance around the desired outcome.
So in that case,
if you have a good surrogate variable.
A very good surrogate is for
example, weight,
with a nice unbiased scale.
If you don't know the person's
actual weight but
you have a scale that's kind of noisy but
on average across all people,
it's as high as it is low and you actually
know how variable it is around the truth.
Then you can use that
information in your analysis and
probably everything will be fine.
That's a very unusual circumstance.
Maybe the second best setting,
which at some level attainable.
Is where you have the truth measured
on some subset of the people and
you can study and
understand some amount of calibration.
And I'm gonna give an example,
so a very common thing that
people do now is they wear,
I have a picture here of fitbit.
And this is a little accelerometer
that you wear around your wrist and
it counts things like steps,
but it's not measuring steps.
It's on your wrist.
It's measuring acceleration.
So they have to use an algorithm to
predict how many steps you're making.
So and sometimes it's accurate and
sometimes it's not.
And maybe even further, your software,
your fitbit software or
your calorie count, your accelerometer
on your watch or your cell phone, will
also not only give you steps but it'll
actually give you calorie consumption.
So what could you do?
Well, if you were very serious
about studying accelerometry,
what you could do is really get people
in the lab, put a mask on them.
Really get very careful measurements
of steps and calorie consumption
while they are wearing a fitbit,
they are wearing these other devices.
And use that to understand
its degree of accuracy.
You could maybe build up models because
you know the truth on that subset
of people, and
using those models employ the strategies
from those models in the instances
where you only have the fitbit data and
you don't have the gold standard data.
So doing a gold standard study,
is probably one of the better
things that you can do.
And if you have that option,
I would highly recommend taking the time
to actually study the variables,
these surrogate variables
that you are looking at.
And I think what often happens at least
In my experience in the scientific world,
whenever we go after these surrogate
variables, and try and figure out how
accurate they are, we always seem to come
away surprised at how inaccurate they are.
How much less accurate they
were then we thought they were.
So at any rate, that is the strategy,
that is very helpful but
if you don't have those
strategies available to you,
well the worst case scenario is you
have to acknowledge limitations.
You don't have a real way
to validate your surrogate.
Maybe using some external data that you
didn't collect, maybe that's an option,
but let's suppose none of these
circumstances are available to you.
Then you wanna make sure you
use skepticism of your results.
For example if you're analyzing BMI and
treating it as if it's body
fat percentage, then you want to think
about your sample and say, well,
do I have a lot of body builders and
midgets and and
extremely tall people in my sample
where BMI may not be as accurate?
Or is my sample kind of in
this range where we know,
it's probably kind of okay and
tends to sort of be and unbiased measure.
You wanna use skepticism in
studying your results and
thing about the noise associate
with your surrogate variables.
And another reasonable strategy is
to use sensitivity analysis for
bias and
variability of your surrogate variable.
So what I mean by sensitivity analysis is,
come up with some idea of how off it's
going to be for
the individual measurements.
And come up with an idea of how
biased it could possibly be, so
if you're studying a food frequency
questionnaire, you might think, okay,
well, what if these food frequency
questionnaires are really underestimating
calorie consumptions by
a thousand calories per day?
Think about that, and
then factor that into the analysis and
see what would happen.
So sensitivity analysis
are always at your disposal and
they're a good way to sort of poke and
prod at what are the consequences of not
measuring what you really want to measure.
And I have this funny thing that says
limitations, until you spread your wings
you have no idea how far you can walk and
there's a picture of a penquin.
I thought that was terrible,
put it up anyway.
And then when to throw in the towel.
So, I thought a lot about recommending
when you throw in the towel,
and so this is the resolution that
I came up with, is prior to running
your analysis, think about how you're
going to interpret your results.
And if the variable that
you're going to use in lieu
of the one that you really want is so
unknown and so
unreliable in estimate
of the desired outcome.
That no results would
change your decision or
state of knowledge, then why bother
running the analysis at all?
So, what I would do is go through the
exercise before you perform the analysis,
before you collect the data.
And then kinda think about your
decision space in the event that
the results come out exactly
as you would hope, or
in the event that the results come up
the exact opposite of what you would hope.
Is the fact that
the surrogate variable is so
inaccurate relative to what
you're trying to measure.
If that's true in neither of those
extremes would it really change your
decision space, then you either need
to improve your surrogate variable,
do some gold standard studies.
Or get a new variable or
something like that,
cuz it's probably not
worth doing at that point.
But I do think if you have
a really noisy surrogate variable,
it is at least worthwhile
to think about whether or
not you're actually gonna
get anything valuable at all
out of your analyses before you undertake
the costly exercise of actually doing it.
Okay, well thank you for your time,
and I look forward to seeing
you in the next lecture.